Summary of Studies
The studies included in this systematic review were published between 2016 and 2022. Three studies (50%) were conducted in the USA, while the remaining 3 studies were carried out in Serbia (n=1, 16.7%), the UK (n=1, 16.7%), and the Netherlands (n=1, 16.7%). The sample size of the RCTs included ranged from 12 to 66, for a total of 201 healthy older adults included in the systematic review.
The mean age of the subjects included ranged from 67.0±1.0 years to 76.0±5.6 years. It should be noticed that Yoshino et al. did not characterize the study sample for gender differences. As a result, based on the remaining 181 participants, the sample of the present study was composed of 83 males and 98 females, with a body composition assessed by BMI ranging from 25.3±1.3 kg/ m2 to 28.6±3.9 kg/m2. Interestingly, 4 studies did not report any standardization in terms of diet and physical activity during the study protocol, while both Zanini et al. and Yoshino et al. instructed study participants to maintain usual diet and physical activity.
Control groups were characterized by placebo administration in all the studies included in the present review (n=6, 100%), indistinguishable from the nutraceutical treatment administered in the intervention group. The characteristics of the studies included are presented in detail in Table 1.
Nutraceutical intervention
The intervention was characterized by the administration of several nutraceuticals based on the study included. More in detail, the experimental treatment included: sodium nitrite, fish oil-derived n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA), hydrogen-rich water, nicotinamide riboside (NR), urolithin A, and whey protein powder (L-Tryptophan [L-Trp], nicotinic acid [NA], and nicotinamide [NAM]).
– Sodium Nitrite. Sodium nitrite was considered as a key intermediary of nitrate–nitrite–NO pathway, increasing NO bioavailability and affecting nitrite-mediated oxidative stress. It was administrated in the study of Rossman et al. for a total of 80 mg per day (40 mg, 2 times per day). The duration of sodium nitrite supplementation was 12 weeks.
– Fish oil-derived n-3 PUFA. N-3 PUFAs supplementation was performed in older subjects according to the preclinical evidence about the increased gene expression of master regulators of mitochondrial function (PPARGC1A and UCP3) and the effects on metabolic and regenerative pathways potentially related to the inhibition of autophagy and atrophy pathways. Fish oil-derived n-3 PUFA was administrated in the study by Yoshino et al. The study participants in the n-3 PUFA group received four 1-g (LOVAZA®️) pills per day, composed of 1.86 g eicosapentaenoic acid (20:5 n-3 PUFA) and 1.50 g docosahexaenoic acid (22:6 n-3 PUFA). The protocol duration was 6 months.
– Hydrogen-rich water. Hydrogen-rich water supplementation has been proposed due to the evidence supporting hydrogen selective interaction with hydroxyl radical and peroxynitrite, promoting the reduction of oxidative stress and positive effects in inflammatory and apoptotic pathways. Hydrogen-rich water was administrated in the study by Zanini et al. Hydrogen-rich water was administered 2 times per day. The protocol duration of hydrogen-rich water supplementation was 6 months.
– Nicotinamide Riboside. Nicotinamide riboside is a NAD precursor, increasing NAD+ availability with potential implications in preventing age-related mitochondria functional decline and mitochondria bioenergetic capacity in animal models. NR was administrated in the study by Elhassan et al. The study participants in the intervention group were orally supplemented with 2 capsules of 250 mg of NR (Niagen, ChromaDex, Irvine, CA), administered twice a day for a total of 1000 mg per day. The protocol duration was 21 days.
– Urolithin A. Urolithin A has been proposed to induce mitochondrial gene expression, stimulating mitophagy and improving muscle function in preclinical studies. Urolithin A supplementation was assessed in the study by Liu et al. The study participants in the intervention group were orally supplemented with 250 mg of softgel containing urolithin A, 4 times per day, for a total of 1000 mg daily. The protocol duration was 4 months.
– Whey protein powder (L-Trp, NA, and NAM). L-Trp, NA, and NAM are involved in the NAD+ metabolisms pathway, functioning as precursors in the biosynthesis process and enhancing NAD+ formation. Therefore, their effects on mitochondria might be related to coenzyme NAD+ and its reduced form NAD(H) that play a role in cellular redox reactions as electron donors in the electron transport chain. In the study by Connell et al., the intervention product was composed of a whey protein powder as a source of tryptophan, to which nicotinic acid (NA) and nicotinamide (NAM) were added. In total, the equivalent of 207.5 mg/day niacin equivalents of NAD+ precursors were supplemented, through L-Trp (210 mg/day at a 60:1 conversion rate), NA (4 mg/day), and NAM (200 mg/day). Subjects in the intervention group were orally supplemented dissolving the powder in 200 mL of orange juice, once a day. The protocol duration was 32 days.
Main findings in terms of muscle mitochondrial modifications
The effects of nutraceuticals on muscle mitochondrial modifications were assessed in 6 terms of: (a) mitochondrial oxidative capacity; (b) mitochondrial antioxidant capacity; (c) mitochondrial volume; (d) mitochondrial bioenergetic capacity; (e) mitochondrial transcriptome.
(a) Mitochondrial oxidative capacity: Yoshino et al. assessed mitochondrial function by microarray analyses. In particular, the study showed significant improvements (p<0.05) in respiratory electron transport ATP synthesis, coupling proteins and heat production, respiratory electron transport, oxidative phosphorylation, and tricarboxylic acid cycle and respiratory electron transport after n-3 PUFA therapy compared with baseline. On the other hand, Liu et al. investigated the effect of urolithin A supplementation on the mean change in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation capacity assessed by maximal ATP production in the first dorsal interosseous muscle and in the tibialis anterior muscle, without reporting significant differences (p=NS).
The study by Elhassan et al. assessed the high-resolution respirometry on muscle without reporting significant improvement in skeletal muscle oxidative phosphorylation and maximal respiratory capacity after NR supplementation (p=NS). Moreover, to assess sirtuin-mediated deacetylation activity, the western blot analysis was performed on skeletal muscle lysates without reporting a significant increase in muscle protein acetylation (p=NS).
Accordingly, the RCT by Connell et al. assessed mitochondrial oxidative capacity by ex vivo high-resolution respirometry on permeabilized muscle fibers obtained from skeletal muscle biopsies. However, no significant differences between groups were underlined in terms of ADP-stimulated (State 3) respiration fueled by complex I linked (malate and octanoyl-carnitine) substrates (p=0.882) and maximally uncoupled mitochondrial respiration (p=0.495). Table 1 reported the results of the studies included in detail.
(b) Mitochondrial antioxidant capacity: Rossman et al. assessed mitochondrial-specific ROS-bioactivity showing a significant decrease (–35%; P<0.05) after sodium nitrite supplementation. In contrast, there was no significant improvement after placebo intervention.
(c) Mitochondrial volume: Rossmann et al. assessed mitochondrial volume by MitoTracker fluorescence without reporting significant differences after sodium nitrite supplementation (p=NS).
(d) Mitochondrial bioenergetic capacity: Liu et al. assessed the effect of urolithin A on biomarkers of mitochondrial health and inflammation, reporting a significant reduction in plasma acylcarnitine levels (p<0.05) and a significant reduction in ceramide levels (p<0.05) in the experimental group. Elhassan et al. found significant improvement in the NAM methylation clearance pathways representing the NAD+ metabolome. More in detail, significant differences were underlined in methyl-nicotinamide (MeNAM) (Intervention Group-IG 1.45 pmol/mg vs Control Group-CG 0.35 pmol/mg; p=0.006), N1-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide (IG 6.6 pmol/mg vs CG 1.1 pmol/mg; p<0.001), and N1-methyl-4-pyridone-5-carboxamide (IG 1.6 pmol/mg vs CG 0.3 pmol/mg; p<0.001).
Similarly, Connell et al. reported skeletal MeNAM levels were significantly higher in subjects receiving NAD+ precursor supplementation (IG: 0.098 ± 0.063 compared with CG: 0.025 ± 0.014; p=0.001), suggesting an increased NAD+ metabolism.
Lastly, Zanini et al. reported no significant differences in terms of NAD +/NADH ratio after HRW supplementation. Table 1 shows the mitochondrial bioenergetic capacity outcomes in detail.
(e) Mitochondrial transcriptome: Yoshino et al. showed significant improvements in gene expression of UCP3 (~30%, p<0.05) and UQCRC1 (~20%, p<0.05) after n-3 PUFA therapy compared with baseline, suggesting potentials effects in mitochondrial biogenesis and function. In contrast, no significant improvements were reported in PPARGC1A, PPARA, PDHA1, CPT1B, CS, UQCRC2, COX4I1, and COX5B gene expression.
On the other hand, in the study of Elhassan et al., the western blot analysis did not highlight significant improvements (p= NS) in the expression of selected mitochondrial proteins in skeletal muscle lysates (CV-ATP5A, CI-NDUFB8, CII-SDHB, CIII-UQCRC2, CIV-MTCO1).

